ARTHASHASTRA: KEY PRINCIPLES OF STATECRAFT

The king who is situated anywhere immediately on the circumference of the conqueror's territory is termed the enemy.
The king who is likewise situated close to the enemy, but separated from the conqueror only by the enemy, is termed the friend of the conqueror.

SAPTANGA THEORY (Seven Pillars of State):
The king, the minister, the country, the fort, the treasury, the army, and the friend are the elements of sovereignty.
Of these, the best qualities of the king are: born of a high family, godly, possessed of valour, seeing through the medium of aged persons, virtuous, truthful, not of a contradictory nature, grateful, having large aims, highly enthusiastic, not addicted to procrastination, powerful to control his neighbouring kings, of resolute mind, having an assembly of ministers of no mean quality, and possessed of a taste for discipline.

THE TREASURY:
The root of wealth is economic activity and lack of it brings material distress. In the absence of fruitful economic activity, both current prosperity and future growth are harmed.
A king can accomplish his desired objects with the treasury. The treasury is the backbone of all state policies.
All state activities depend first on the treasury. Therefore a king shall devote his best attention to the treasury.

SAMA, DANA, BHEDA, DANDA (Four Strategies):
Conciliation (Sama): The use of sweet and persuasive language to achieve goals without conflict.
Gift-giving (Dana): The use of economic inducements, rewards, or bribes to win allies.
Dissension (Bheda): The strategy of creating divisions among enemies to weaken them.
Force (Danda): The application of punishment or military action as the last resort.

ON SPIES AND INTELLIGENCE:
The king shall employ spies disguised as householders, merchants, ascetics, students, mendicants, and classmates.
All affairs of the king shall be maintained with the help of spies.
Knowledge of the true state of affairs is the lamp of all sciences.

ON ALLIANCES:
One who has an army that is contented and capable of fighting is invincible.
An ally is one who is of the same family, coming from the same region, being without enemies, whose friendship has been well-tested and who has adequate resources.
The enemy of my enemy is my friend.

ON FOREIGN POLICY:
The sixfold policy consists of: peace, war, neutrality, marching, alliance, and making peace with one and waging war with another.
When the advantage to be derived from peace and war are equal, one should prefer peace.
